# StockMarket_explainableAI
### Contributor: Sohyun Lee, Shin Ehara, Jou-Ying Lee

With big data collected at an exponential growing speed today, the automated decision power these information is capable of providing has been recognized and has since been at the forefront of technological developments -- especially in the area of artificial intelligence. 

Throughout the past decade, hundreds of machine learning algorithms have been developed with distinct strengths and useful areas of application. However, these models are commonly introduced as traditional baseline models because they do not generalize or perform well on “large datasets” such as images, audios, or videos, etc. Nowadays, tools applied for pattern recognition are advancing more towards prevalent uses of deep learning models that learn and recognize complex underlying data patterns. While these models have proven outstanding abilities in making predictions based on complicated input data, the problem lies in these algorithms’ “un-explainability”. Regardless of the problem being solved, let it be image recognition, object detection, or involved predictions, given the overly complex nature of these deep neural networks, users have commonly found it hard to trust the works of these outcomes -- because their learning process is practically untrackable, therefore resulting in un-explainability of these final predictions. Inspired by this phenomenon, this proposal presents a project that sets to address this issue in machine learning. 

Hoping to resolve actual concerns arising from real-life practices, this project revolves around deep learning applications within the financial market. It is undebatable that the stock market is one of the most unpredictable and difficult areas of study, yet investigation into product price and return have always been at the center in quantitative analysis. Stock data are most commonly represented as time series, and therefore have previously primarily been modelled with traditional time series algorithms or conventional baseline machine learning models. While RNNs and LSTMs are now more frequently used to predict these time series trends, this project intends to also include CNNs to provide a comprehensive study on the performances of image recognition versus other techniques in predicting the financial market. 

As the financial market is changing all the time, this project projects to work not only on historical stock data but also real-time daily and minute level financial market data. Therefore, Yahoo Finance, as one of the most reliable stock exchange sources, is to be deployed for analyses. There is readily available PythonAPI which enables remote data access to the market data, and will be pulled and utilized as the data source for this research.

Table 1 below shows the ending five entries of aggregated price data on a daily basis for S&P 500 ETF Trust stock market data between June 2020 to December 2020, and Figure 1 is a Time Series representation of the closing price through this whole period.


Table1: S&P 500 ETF Trust stock data pulled from Yahoo! Finance


Figure1: S&P 500 ETF Trust stock data closing price plot (2020-06-01 -- 2020-12-01)
In specific, the volatility of a specific market during a specific time period will be inspected, and therefore this problem for prediction is purposefully structured as a regression-based prediction. The focus for this project will be image recognition based regression -- that is using CNN networks for time series prediction. Time series will be converted to image based polar coordinate relationships to assemble this approach as an image recognition task. Meta-Labelling technique will be applied to these time series in order to provide the outcomes of stock forecasting labels of “sell” or “buy” for classification. Similar research has shown that CNNs are able to achieve satisfying accuracy scores, yet none have explained the reasoning behind this. While this shall not be too big of a surprise, this project sets to address this particular problem by applying the Grad-CAM algorithm to this built CNN network. By inspecting the class-activation maps generated by this technique, and mapping them to the convolutional architecture, this project aims to study why the network made the prediction it did, as well as how parts in these images might have contributed to making the correct or incorrect decisions.

This project will require all members in the group to truly grasp model details regarding CNN models, and at the same time solidly understand conceptual and implemental components of the Grad-CAM algorithm. The outcome of this project is proposed to be a written paper with thorough descriptions on algorithm implementation details as well as justifications for model performances.
